
Conflict Test Battery for Studying the Act of Facing Threats in Pursuit of Rewards 

ORIGINAL RESEARCH published: 04 May 2021 doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.645769 


## Conflict Test Battery for Studying the Act of Facing Threats in Pursuit of Rewards 

Elizabeth Illescas-Huerta[1] _**,**_ Leticia Ramirez-Lugo[1] _**,**_ Rodrigo O. Sierra[2] _**,**_ Jorge A. Quillfeldt[3] _**and**_ Francisco Sotres-Bayon[1*] 

_1Cell Physiology Institute-Neuroscience, National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico 2Department of Physiology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary 3Department of Biophysics, Biosciences Institute, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil_ 


## **ABSTRACT** 

Survival depends on the ability of animals to avoid threats and approach rewards. Traditionally, these two opposing motivational systems have been studied separately. In nature, however, they regularly compete for the control of behavior. When threat- and reward-eliciting stimuli (learned or unlearned) occur simultaneously, a motivational conflict emerges that challenges individuals to weigh available options and execute a single behavioral response (avoid or approach). Most previous animal models using approach/avoidance conflicts have often focused on the ability to avoid threats by forgoing or delaying the opportunity to obtain rewards. In contrast, behavioral tasks designed to capitalize on the ability to actively choose to execute approach behaviors despite threats are scarce. Thus, we developed a behavioral test battery composed of three conflict tasks to directly study rats confronting threats to obtain rewards guided by innate and conditioned cues. One conflict task involves crossing a potentially electrified grid to obtain food on the opposite end of a straight alley, the second task is based on the step-down threat avoidance paradigm, and the third one is a modified version of the open field test. We used diazepam to pharmacologically validate conflict behaviors in our tasks. We found that, regardless of whether competing stimuli were conditioned or innate, a low diazepam dose decreased risk assessment and facilitated taking action to obtain rewards in the face of threats during conflict, without affecting choice behavior when there was no conflict involved. Using this pharmacologically validated test battery of ethologically designed innate/learned conflict tasks could help understand the fundamental brain mechanisms underlying the ability to confront threats to achieve goals. 

**Keywords: approach-avoidance, choice, decisionmaking, prefrontal, amygdala, accumbens, fear** 

## **INTRODUCTION** 

## **MATERIALS AND METHODS** 

A total of 160 adult male Wistar rats (Instituto de Fisiología Celular breeding colony) 2–3 months of age, weighing 250–300 g were housed in individual polyethylene cages, handled daily to diminish stress responses, and maintained on a standard 12 h light/dark schedule. All experiments were performed during the light phase. To maintain a stable motivation to eat or drink during behavioral training and tests, rats were food restricted (12 g/day of standard laboratory rat chow with a 5-g bonus feeding at the end of each week to maintain rats at 85% of their initial weight).

### **Task 1: Crossing-Mediated Conflict Task** 

Rats were trained and tested in straight alleys that consisted of acrylic walls with stainless-steel frames (100 cm long × 30 cm wide × 50 cm tall), located in a sound-attenuating cubicle (150 cm long × 70 cm wide × 140 cm tall). The alleys consisted of three zones: two “safe” zones and one “threat” zone (Figure 1A). Each “safe” zone (20 cm long × 30 cm wide) was located on the opposite ends of the alley, and the “threat” zone (60 cm long × 30 cm wide) was located between the two “safe” zones. The floor of the “threat” zone was made of stainless-steel bars (4.8 mm diameter), which delivered a scramble footshock (Coulbourn Instruments, United States), while the floor of “safe” zones was made of acrylic. The “safe” zone included a speaker and standard operant chamber components (cue light, a lever connected to a pellet dispenser, and a food receptacle). The alleys were interfaced with a computer running custom scripts that controlled apparatus hardware (food pellet delivery, cue lights, speakers, and shocker) and recorded task events (lever presses at each end of the alley). The shock grids, the alley floors, and the walls were cleaned with soapy water and 70% alcohol and dried with paper towels between experiments. Prior to conflict training, all rats were trained to press a lever to obtain sucrose pellets (45 mg, dustless precision pellets, Bioserve, United States) in a fixed reinforcement schedule (each lever press was reinforced with one pellet). All sessions started and ended with context-alone exposure (5 min without cue lights, shocks, or noise). 

**==> picture [286 x 174] intentionally omitted <==**

**FIGURE 1.** Conflict test battery to study the ability to confront threats in pursuit of rewards. **(A)** During the crossing-mediated conflict task, hungry rats are trained to repeatedly choose to cross a grid (threat zone, red) to press a lever to obtain food (pellets, reward) in the opposite side of the straight alley (safe zone, green), guided by conditioned cues (white noise and light). **(B)** During the step-down avoidance-mediated conflict task, thirsty rats are trained to choose to step down from an elevated platform (safe zone, green) onto a conditioned grid (threat zone, red) to approach a bottle containing sweetened water (saccharin, reward). **(C)** During the foraging-mediated innate conflict task, hungry rats must choose to move from the periphery of the arena (safe zone, green) to enter the intensely illuminated center of the arena (threat zone, red) to obtain food (pellets, reward). 

#### **Conflict Training** 

Conflict training involved five succeeding stages: two stages of reward training (reward association and reward crossing), two stages of threat training (threat association and threat crossing), and a final stage of discrimination training to distinguish between conflict and no-conflict trials. Conflict training occurred over a total of 30 days. 

##### *Reward training*

Initially, rats confined to one end of the alley (“safe” zone) using an opaque acrylic wall were trained to associate food availability with a light cue ( *Reward association* ). A pellet was dispensed to the food receptacle with each lever press when the cue light was illuminated (light trial), while no pellet was delivered in the absence of light (no-light trial). Each light trial ended after a randomly assigned number of 

rewarded pressing events were achieved (ranging from 5 to 20 presses; a custom script running in a computer associated with the apparatus generated a random number and assigned the type of trial to present), whereas each no-light trial ended after a randomly assigned time had elapsed (ranging from 30 to 180 s). Each reward conditioning session was limited to 30 min, and it involved ∼10 light trials and ∼10 no-light trials, which resulted in ∼15 min per trial type. One session was given per day across 6 days (days 1–6 of conflict training). Next, rats were trained to cross from one end of the alley to the opposite side (from one “safe” zone to the other) to obtain food signaled by light ( *Reward crossings* ). Short acrylic barriers (9 cm tall) were placed between the grid and “safe” zones to delimit and commit choice-mediated crossing behavior in time and space (choose point). A reward crossing trial started when a light was illuminated in the side of the alley opposite to the location of the rat. The trial ended when the light was turned off, after either the rat had crossed to the opposite “safe” zone and pressed the lever or 180 s had passed without crossing. To promote goal-oriented crosses guided by tracking location of light cue, rather than nonsignaled habitual reactions, rats received one to three reinforced lever presses on the same “safe” zone. Each reward crossing session was composed of 30 trials. One session was given per day for 5 days (days 7–11 of conflict training). Reward training occurred over a total of 11 days (6 days of reward association and 5 days of reward crossing training). By this point, rats had learned that reward crossings involved actively tracking food availability signaled by the cue light in each of the “safe” zones of the alley in the absence of conflict (crossing to obtain food without threat). 

##### *Threat training* 

Rats confined to the “threat” zone (middle of the alley) using opaque acrylic walls and a ceiling (similar dimensions to standard classical threat conditioning chambers: 30 cm long, 25 cm wide, 30 cm tall) were trained to associate a white noise (85 dB for 30 s) with a mild footshock (0.5 mA for 1 s) ( *Threat association* ). To allow the sound coming from 

opposite sides of the alley to enter the confined conditioning area, the acrylic ceiling was perforated (1.2 cm diameter). Foot shocks were randomly delivered during the 30-s noise presentation to avoid a temporal noise/shock associations that may limit threat-related responses to a specific time (a custom script running in a computer associated with the apparatus generated a random number and delivered the shock). Five noise-shock pairings were delivered per day with a variable intertrial interval of 1–3 min. One session was given per day for 4 days. On the next day, two noise-alone trials (in the absence of shocks) were delivered to test for cued threat memory (days 12–16 of conflict training). Next, rats were trained to cross the alley to obtain food (guided by the light cue), while the threat cue (noise) was presented simultaneously ( *Threat crossings* ). A threat crossing trial started and ended the same way as a reward crossing trials. The difference between reward and threat crossings was that during threat crossings, rats were challenged to cross to the other side of the alley to obtain food (signaled by the conditioned light) by facing the cooccurring threat (0.5 mA shock signaled by the conditioned noise). Short acrylic barriers (introduced since Reward crossing training) prevented rats from getting exposed to the electrified grid before committing to cross (hesitation at the choice point). The duration of threat crossing trials was increased across days to gradually intensify threat in crossing sessions. Intertrial intervals ranged from 1 to 3 min, and each session was limited to 30 min. One session was given per day for 5 days (days 17–21 of conflict training). Threat crossing trials lasted 30 s in the first 2 days, 60 s on the third day, 90 s on the fourth day, and 120 s on the fifth day of training. Each trial ended either after the time of crossing elapsed (30–120 s) or when rats successfully crossed and pressed the lever on the opposite side of the alley. Threat training occurred over a total of 10 days (5 days of threat association and 5 days of threat crossing training). By this point, rats had learned that threat crossings guided by the simultaneous occurrence of light and sound cues involved conflict (crossing to obtain food despite threat). 

##### *Discrimination training* 
The final stage of conflict training consisted of learning to discriminate between no-conflict (crossing to obtain food without threat) and conflict (crossing to obtain food despite threat) trials across 9 days ( *Discrimination* ). Each discrimination session consisted on a total of 30 crossing trials. Each session was divided into three blocks of 10 trials. Each block of 10 trials consisted of seven or nine noconflict trials and one or three conflict trials (10 or 30% chance of threat trials, respectively). To prevent rats from predicting types of trials, they were presented in a different sequence across 10-trial blocks (a custom script running in a computer associated with the apparatus generated a random number and assigned the type of trial to present considering the constricted number of types of trials). On each trial, rats were allowed a limited time to choose whether to cross or not to cross the alley (180 s). One session was given per day for 9 days (days 22–30 of conflict training). To gradually and progressively increase the risk of threat crossing, the proportion of conflict trials and intensity of shock increased across days. Conflict crossings were presented with a 10% chance of threat (3 conflicts vs. 27 no-conflict trials) and 0.5 mA shock intensity the first 3 days (22–24 days), the next 3 days (25–27 days) with a 30% chance of threat (9 conflict vs. 21 no-conflict trials) using the same shock intensity as the sessions before, and finally, the last 3 days (28–30 days) with the same percentage of threat occurrence as the session before but with increased intensity of shock of 0.1 mA/day until it reached 0.8 mA at the end of discrimination training. At this point, rats had learned to discriminate between conflict against no-conflict trials. Rats that did not learn to discriminate between types of trials by the end of discrimination training ( _p_ > 0.05 in the comparison between conflict and no-conflict trials in the last block of trials: 2 out of 18), and rats that did not learn to cross in 180 s were excluded from the study (2 out of 18). Therefore, all trials for all animals included in the study were rewarded. 

#### **Conflict Test** 

The conflict test was performed 1 day after conflict training ended. Rats were tested with 10 crossing trials. These trials were presented in the same conditions as the last day of discrimination training (30% chance of threat: three conflict and seven no-conflict pseudorandomly presented trials) but in the absence of shocks. Results were expressed comparing the average of conflict against no-conflict trials before (pretest) and after (test) injections. 

### **Data Collection and Analysis** 

All behaviors were recorded with digital video cameras (Provision, model D-380D5) located above each task apparatus. Lever-pressing events were recorded by a computer running MATLAB[®] (MathWorks Inc.) custom scripts interfaced with the straight alley. Lever-pressing events (presses per minute) during light or no-light trials were expressed as blocks of 10 min. Each session (one per day) consisted of three of these 10-min blocks. Crossing latencies consisted of the total time (seconds) that rats spent to cross to the opposite side of the straight alley and press the lever to obtain food. Latencies to cross were expressed as blocks of 10 trials. Each training session (one per day) consisted of three of these 10-trial blocks, and the test session consisted of one block of 10 trials. Freezing responses were expressed as the percent of time spent without movement (except for respiration) during context alone exposure (5 min baseline before noise presentations) or 60 s after noise presentations.  The number of risk assessment behavioral events (approach/avoidance oscillations toward the reward site) were counted at the choice point, where rats must choose to cross. Risk assessment behavior was evaluated at the choice point: hesitation to cross the alley. During the conflict crossing task, a hesitation event was counted every time a rat touched, with at least two paws, the acrylic barrier dividing the safe and threat zones (choice point) and returned with its four paws to the safe zone without crossing.

## **RESULTS** 

We found that DZPM at a low dose did not affect locomotion, anxiety-like behavior, nor motor coordination, as indicated, respectively, by similar levels of total distance traveled (SAL, 222.9 cm; DZPM, 217.4 cm; _p_ = 0.98) and the number of entries to the center of the open field (SAL, 1.94; DZPM, 1.0; _p_ = 0.444), as well as similar times to arrive to the end of a narrow elevated beam, as compared to the control group (SAL, 9.6 s; DZPM, 12.8 s; _p_ = 0.99). We evaluated the effect of this DZPM dose on two types of choice-mediated conflict behaviors in our three conflict tasks: (1) the time it takes rats to successfully confront threats to obtain rewards and (2) the number of times rats displayed risk assessment responses toward the reward site. 

### **Diazepam Facilitated Crossings During Conflict Test Without Affecting No-Conflict Behaviors** 

The crossing-mediated conflict task is a modified version of a task previously used to map self-stimulation brain sites. In a series of hallmark studies, Olds and Milner (1954) used such a task where the reward after crossing the grid was electrical estimulation. Our task involves natural food reward rather than an electrical reward and the use of discrete learned cues to guide choice behavior. Thus, our task requires that a hungry rat, previously trained to press a lever for food cued by light, crosses an electrified grid to get to reach a lever on the other side of the straight alley that triggers a food dispenser. Our task allows for isolation of key variables in the same individual: appetitive drive indicated by latency to approach in safe no-conflict trials, defensive reactive response indicated by freezing in the “threat” zone, and competition between aversive and appetitive drives indicated by latency to approach in conflict trials. 

To evaluate the effect of DZPM on crossing-mediated conflict behavior at test, rats received conflict training in three consecutive stages: reward and threat trainings, followed by trial discrimination training (Figure 2A). Threat and reward training involved associative and crossing sessions. During reward association sessions (6 days), rats confined to one of the ends of the straight alley (“safe” zone) gradually learned that a light cue was associated with the availability of food after pressing a lever, whereas the absence of light was associated with lack of food availability, as indicated by the progressively decreasing lever-pressing levels in no-light trials as compared to stable lever pressing in light trials across training days [two-way repeated-measures ANOVA, group: _F_ (1,26) = 12.3, _p_ = 0.001; trial block: _F_ (17,442) = 6.09, _p_ < 0.001; interaction: _F_ (17,442) = 24.0, _p_ < 0.001]. Notice that reward conditioning shifted an apparent natural preference for lever pressing during the absence of light cue at the beginning of training [day 1, first trial block: light, 7.58; nolight, 11.63 presses/min; Student’s two-tailed paired _t_ test, _t_ (13) = −2.69, _p_ = 0.018], to stable pressing preference guided by the light cue at the end of training compared to trials in the absence of light [day 6, session average: light, 10.12; no-light, 4.49 presses/min; Student’s two-tailed paired _t_ test, _t_ (13) = 7.79, _p_ < 0.001]. During reward crossing sessions (5 days), the alley was opened to allow for rats to learn to track food availability on opposite ends of the alley guided by the light cue, as indicated by a sustained decrease in time spent to choose to cross the alley (latency) across days [one-way repeated-measures ANOVA, _F_ (14,182) = 16.4, _p_ < 0.001]. Notice that rats rapidly learned to cross for food cued by light, as indicated by long latencies at the beginning of training (day 7, first trial block: 20.4 s) as compared to short stable latencies by the end of training [day 11, session average: 8.7 s; Student’s two-tailed paired _t_ test, _t_ (13) = 6.11, _p_ < 0.001]. 

**==> picture [286 x 285] intentionally omitted <==**

**FIGURE 2.** Diazepam decreases crossing latencies and hesitation events during conflict without affecting no-conflict trials. **(A)** Rats acquired crossing-mediated conflict in 30 days ( _n_ = 14). First, hungry rats, confined to the safe zone (green), learned to associate pressing a lever with food availability cued by a light (reward conditioning), followed by training to cross to the opposite safe zone of the straight alley to obtain food cued by light (no-conflict crossings). Then, rats, confined to the threat zone (grid, red) of the alley, learned to associate the occurrence of white noise with a mild footshock (threat conditioning), followed by training to cross with both learned contingencies (light/food and noise/shock) presented simultaneously (conflict crossings). Finally, rats were trained to discriminate crossing trials guided by no-conflict (light/food alone) or conflict (light/food and noise/shock) cues. Data from lever pressing (per minute) and time to cross to the opposite safe zone of the alley (latency in seconds) are presented in blocks of three trials per day, whereas percent time spent freezing (with or without shock) is presented for each trial. By the end of crossing-mediated conflict training, rats showed high crossing latencies during conflict trials (black) compared to no-conflict trials (green). **(B)** Before injection (pre-test), saline solution and diazepam groups (SAL, _n_ = 7; DZPM, _n_ = 7) showed similarly high crossing latencies (top) and hesitation events toward the reward site (bottom) during Conflict trials and similarly low crossing latencies and hesitations events during No-conflict ( _left_ , trials averages of experimental groups; _right_ , trial by trial performance of representative rats). The following day, after injection (test), the diazepam-treated rats decreased crossing latencies (top) and hesitation events (bottom) during conflict trials (no shock) while leaving no-conflict trials intact, as compared to the saline-treated rats ( _left_ , trial averages of experimental groups; _right_ , trial by trial performance of the same representative rats shown in pretest). **(C)** Rats were separately trained in threat and reward conditioning tasks. Before (pre-test) and after (test) injection, SAL and DZPM groups (SAL, _n_ = 5; DZPM, _n_ = 5) showed similar reactive freezing responses during aversive conditioning and numbers of lever presses per minute during appetitive conditioning (SAL, _n_ = 6; DZPM, _n_ = 7). Error bars indicate Standard Error of Mean (SEM). BL, baseline. ** _p_ < 0.01; *** _p_ < 0.001. 

Threat training was initiated 1 day after reward training. During threat association sessions (5 days), rats, confined to the middle of the alley (“threat” zone), were conditioned and tested. Rats rapidly learned to associate noise presentations with shock occurrence, as indicated by increased freezing levels across the first day of conditioning [day 12, Student’s two-tailed paired _t_ test, _t_ (13) = −5.28, _p_ < 0.001]. Consistent with this learning, rats showed robust threat memory retrieval elicited by noise in the absence of shock, as indicated by high freezing levels during the test compared to preconditioning baseline levels [day 16, Student’s two-tailed paired _t_ test, _t_ (13) = −5.23, _p_ < 0.001]. Between initial conditioning and test, rats exhibited escape-like behaviors as indicated by variable freezing levels (days 13–15). Such threat-elicited behavior reflects the unexpected shock delivery timing during noise presentations (see section “Materials and Methods”) intended to prime active, rather than passive, defensive responses when challenged to cross the alley. Starting the next day, the alley was opened to allow crossings. During threat crossing training (5 days), rats learned to cross to the opposite end of the alley to obtain food despite an electrified grid signaled by noise presentations, as indicated by increased crossing latencies across days [one-way repeated-measures ANOVA, _F_ (14,182) = 142.4, _p_ < 0.001]. By gradually and progressively increasing the duration of time allowed to cross the grid across days (see section “Materials and Methods”), rats learned to limit threat crossing response timing in the choice point, as indicated by short latencies in the beginning (day 17 first trial block: 26.1 s) compared to long latencies at the end of training [day 21 session average: 113.3 s; Student’s twotailed paired _t_ test, _t_ (13) = −16.6, _p_ < 0.001]. 

These results indicate that, at this point, rats had learned reward and threat contingencies separately. In the final conflict training stage, rats received discrimination training (9 days). Rats learned to distinguish, in the same session, between pseudorandomly presented crossing trials that involved conflict (light and noise presented simultaneously) against those that occurred in the absence of conflict (light without noise), as indicated by increasingly long latencies during conflict and low latencies during no-conflict trials across days [two-way repeated-measures ANOVA, group: _F_ (1,15) = 34.2, _p_ < 0.001; trial block: _F_ (26,390) = 2.72, _p_ < 0.001; interaction: _F_ (26,390) = 1.53, _p_ = 0.047]. Notice that rats started training with similar latencies between trial types [day 22 session trial averages: conflict, 94.0 s vs. noconflict, 78.8 s; Student’s two-tailed paired _t_ test, _t_ (13) = −1.66, _p_ = 0.119] and ended (day 30 session average) with prominently high latencies during conflict trials (81.6 s) as compared to low latencies during no-conflict trials [22.7 s; Student’s two-tailed paired _t_ test, _t_ (13) = −8.00, _p_ < 0.001]. 

To evaluate the effect of DZPM on crossing-mediated conflict behavior at test, rats were separated into two groups matched by similar crossing latencies within trial types and maintained differences between trial types [test, factorial, ANOVA, pre-test, group: _F_ (1,24) = 0.07, _p_ = 0.787; trials: _F_ (1.24) = 20.65, _p_ < 0.001; interaction: _F_ (1,24) = 0.076, _p_ = 0.784] (Figure 2B, top). The next day (day 31), rats were tested with 10 crossing trials, in the absence of footshock, after SAL or DZPM injections. Notably, we found that DZPM decreased crossing latencies during conflict test without affecting no-conflict trials, as indicated by low latencies in DZPM-injected rats (23.3 s) compared to long latencies in saline-injected rats (62.6 s) during conflict trials, yet similar latencies between groups during no-conflict trials (DZPM, 14.7 s; SAL, 19.4 s) [test, factorial, ANOVA, test, group: _F_ (1,24) = 10.6, _p_ = 0.003; trial block: _F_ (1,24) = 14.75; _p_ < 0.001; interaction: _F_ (1,24) = 6.58; _p_ = 0.016]. Notice that the DZPM-treated rats crossed as rapidly when conflict was involved as when the conflict was absent, as indicated by similar latencies in conflict as compared to no-conflict trials during test after DZPM injection (23.3 and 14.7 s latencies, respectively; _post hoc_ comparison after ANOVA: _p_ = 0.80). 

In addition to the crossing latencies, we evaluated the effect of DZPM on risk assessment behavior evaluated by the expression of hesitation events in the conflict and noconflict trials (Figure 2B, bottom). Before injection, both saline and DZPM groups showed similarly high numbers of hesitation events in conflict trials and similarly low number of hesitation events during no-conflict trials [pretest, factorial ANOVA, group: _F_ (1,24) = 0.40, _p_ = 0.53; trials: _F_ (1.24) = 137.6, _p_ < 0.000; interaction: _F_ (1,24) = 0.80, _p_ = 0.378]. The next day, after injection, we found that DZPM blocked the expression of hesitation events during the conflict test without affecting no-conflict trials, as indicated by almost a complete lack of hesitation events displayed by DZPM-injected rats (0.047 events) compared to high amount of hesitation events displayed by the salineinjected rats (2.47 events) during conflict trials [test, factorial ANOVA, group: _F_ (1,24) = 38.42, _p_ = 0.000; trial block: _F_ (1,24) = 36.36; _p_ < 0.000; interaction: _F_ (1,24) = 33.58; _p_ = 0.000], yet similar hesitation events between groups during no-conflict trials (DZPM, 0.00 events; SAL, 0.081 events). Thus, consistent with the effect on crossing latencies, although DZPM decreased risk assessment behavior during conflict trials, it did not affect no-conflict trials (0.00 and 0.04 hesitation events, respectively, _post hoc_ comparison after ANOVA: _p_ = 0.99). Surprisingly, even though DZPM decreased both the crossing latencies and the risk assessment behavior only during conflict trials, these behavioral responses appear to be independent of each other, as indicated by lack of correlation between them in both experimental groups (Pearson correlation test, SAL, _R_ = 0.49, _p_ = 0.25; DZPM, _R_ = 0.28, _p_ = 0.53; for example, see rat 3 for lack of direct relationship between latencies and hesitations in Supplementary Figure 2). Figure 2B insets and Supplementary Figure 2 show trial by trial performance comparison of individual representative rats before (pretest) and after (test) injection of either SAL or DZPM, highlighting that DZPM facilitated alley crossings and abolished risk assessment behavior that involves selecting the appropriate choice behavior (approach a reward despite threat) guided by competing aversive and appetitive memories. 

To test whether this DZPM effect could be explained by impairment on the expression of threat and/or reward memories independently, we injected SAL or DZPM in separate groups of rats before threat and reward conditioning retrieval tests (Figure 2C). Separate groups of rats were subjected to threat conditioning and reward conditioning as above (see section “Threat Association and Reward Association Training”, respectively) and tested for memory retrieval on the last day after injection of either DZPM or SAL. During threat and reward training (pre-test), both saline- and DZPM-injected rats showed similarly high levels of freezing and lever pressing [Student’s two-tailed unpaired _t_ test, _t_ (8) = −0.21, _p_ = 0.83; _t_ (11) = 0.06, _p_ = 0.95]. After injection (test), we found that DZPM did not affect threat and reward memory expression, as indicated by similar freezing (DZPM, 57.33; SAL, 51.6% freezing) and lever-pressing levels (DZPM, 8.7; SAL, 9.6 presses/min) compared to their respective saline groups during the retrieval test [Student’s two-tailed unpaired _t_ test, _t_ (8) = −0.49, _p_ = 0.63; _t_ (11) = −1.03, _p_ = 0.32]. Finally, we evaluated whether crossing-mediated choice behavior during the conflict test was goal directed or habitual by retraining rats for 3 days, giving rats free access to food for a day and the following day evaluated for crossing behavior. We confirmed that crossing behavior was guided by goals and not by habits, as indicated by maintained trial discrimination but increased latencies in both conflict and no-conflict trials in satiated (conflict trials, 154 s; noconflict trials, 59 s) vs. no-satiated rats (conflict trials, 64.6 s; no-conflict trials, 17 s) during test [comparison: conflict trials, Student’s two-tailed paired _t_ test, _t_ (13) = −5.43, _p_ < 0.001, no-conflict trials, Student’s two-tailed paired _t_ test, _t_ (13) = −684, _p_ < 0.001]. These results indicate that DZPM does not affect threat- and reward-related behaviors _per se_ but rather facilitates goal-directed conflict behaviors that involve simultaneously occurring threat and rewardpredicting stimuli that compete for the selection of the appropriate choice behavior. Thus, taken together, these findings validate our crossing-mediated conflict task by showing that DZPM facilitates the ability of rats to choose to confront learned threats to execute learned motivational responses that lead to obtaining food. 